README.md, before:

<img src="assets/Apoth3osis.webp" alt="Apoth3osis Logo" width="140"/>

<sub><strong>Our tech stack is ontological:</strong><br>
<strong>Hardware — Physics</strong><br>
<strong>Software — Mathematics</strong><br><br>
<strong>Our engineering workflow is simple:</strong> discover, build, grow, learn & teach</sub>

---

<sub>
<strong>Notice of Proprietary Information</strong><br>
This document outlines foundational concepts and methodologies developed during internal research and development at Apoth3osis. To protect our intellectual property and adhere to client confidentiality agreements, the code, architectural details, and performance metrics presented herein may be simplified, redacted, or presented for illustrative purposes only. This paper is intended to share our conceptual approach and does not represent the full complexity, scope, or performance of our production-level systems. The complete implementation and its derivatives remain proprietary.
</sub>

---

# Generative Stack - Verified Lean 4 Formalization

<p align="center">
  <strong>Machine-checked proof that mathematical structure emerges generatively from the Void</strong><br/>
  <em>
    Lean 4 formalization of the 7-layer hierarchy: Void → LoF → Eigenforms → Heyting → Surreals → Combinators → Types
  </em>
</p>

<p align="center">
  <img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/Lean-4-blue" alt="Lean 4"/>
  <img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/sorry-0-brightgreen" alt="No sorry"/>
  <img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/status-verified-success" alt="Verified"/>
</p>


## Credo

> *"The genome doesn't specify the organism; it offers a set of pointers to regions in the space of all possible forms, relying on the laws of physics and computation to do the heavy lifting."*
> — **Michael Levin**

Our company operates as a lens for cognitive pointers: identifying established theoretical work and translating it into computationally parsable structures. By turning ideas into formal axioms, and axioms into verifiable code, we create the "Lego blocks" required to build complex systems with confidence.

### Acknowledgment

We humbly thank the collective intelligence of humanity for providing the technology and culture we cherish. We do our best to properly reference the authors of the works utilized herein, though we may occasionally fall short. Our formalization acts as a reciprocal validation—confirming the structural integrity of their original insights while securing the foundation upon which we build. In truth, all creative work is derivative; we stand on the shoulders of those who came before, and our contributions are simply the next link in an unbroken chain of human ingenuity.

---

---

Part of the broader HeytingLean formal verification project: https://apoth3osis.io

## Overview

This repository contains a **standalone, verifiable** Lean 4 formalization of the Generative Stack - a 7-layer mathematical hierarchy proving that:

1. **Numbers arise** from pure distinction (Laws of Form)
2. **Fixed points exist** (Lawvere's theorem, type-theoretic and categorical)
3. **Games encode arithmetic** (Surreal number bridge)
4. **Logic structures emerge** (Heyting algebras from nuclei)
5. **Dimensional ratchets** constrain modality (1D→2D→3D)

## Quick Start

```bash
# 1. Ensure you have Lean 4 (elan recommended)
curl https://raw.githubusercontent.com/leanprover/elan/master/elan-init.sh -sSf | sh

# 2. Clone and build
git clone https://github.com/Abraxas1010/generative-stack-lean.git
cd generative-stack-lean
lake update
lake build --wfail

# 3. Verify with our script
./scripts/verify_generative_stack.sh
```

### Interactive Visualizations (GitHub Pages)

- **Landing Page:** https://abraxas1010.github.io/generative-stack-lean/artifacts/visuals/index.html
- **2D Proof Map:** https://abraxas1010.github.io/generative-stack-lean/artifacts/visuals/generative_2d.html
- **3D Proof Map:** https://abraxas1010.github.io/generative-stack-lean/artifacts/visuals/generative_3d.html

## Key Theorems

| Theorem | Location | Significance |
|---------|----------|--------------|
| `LawvereFixedPoint.lawvere_fixed_point` | `LoF/Bauer/LawvereFixedPoint.lean` | Type-theoretic Lawvere |
| `ccc_lawvere_fixed_point` | `LoF/Bauer/LawvereCategorical.lean` | CCC categorical form |
| `toIGame_addConway` | `Numbers/Surreal/BridgeToPGamePreservation.lean` | Addition preservation |
| `toIGame_negConway` | `Numbers/Surreal/BridgeToPGamePreservation.lean` | Negation preservation |
| `denote_steps` | `LoF/Combinators/Denotational.lean` | SKY combinator soundness |
| `reentry_fixed_eq` | `LoF/Nucleus.lean` | Fixed point identity |
| `omega_is_heyting` | `LoF/HeytingCore.lean` | Heyting from nucleus |

## Directory Structure

```
HeytingLean/
├── LoF/                    # Laws of Form layer
│   ├── Nucleus.lean        # Re-entry nuclei
│   ├── HeytingCore.lean    # Heyting algebra emergence
│   ├── BoundaryHeyting.lean
│   ├── Bauer/              # Eigenforms & Lawvere
│   │   ├── LawvereFixedPoint.lean
│   │   ├── LawvereCategorical.lean
│   │   ├── Eigenforms.lean
│   │   └── ...
│   └── Combinators/        # SKY calculus
│       ├── SKY.lean
│       └── Denotational.lean
├── Numbers/                # Surreal numbers
│   ├── SurrealCore.lean
│   └── Surreal/
│       ├── BridgeToPGame.lean
│       ├── BridgeToPGamePreservation.lean
│       └── LoFDerivation.lean
├── Topos/                  # Dimensional ratchet
│   ├── DimensionalRatchet.lean
│   └── DimensionalRatchetTranslate.lean
├── Quantum/                # OML layer
│   ├── OML/Core.lean
│   └── Translate/
└── Tests/
    └── UnifiedMathSanity.lean
```

## Proof Visualizations

Explore the proof structure in 2D and 3D:

<table>
<tr>
<td align="center" width="50%">
<strong>2D Proof Map</strong><br/>
<em>Pan, zoom, search 259 declarations</em><br/>
<a href="https://abraxas1010.github.io/generative-stack-lean/artifacts/visuals/generative_2d.html">
  <img src="artifacts/visuals/generative_2d_preview.svg" alt="2D Proof Map preview" width="100%"/>
</a><br/>
<a href="https://abraxas1010.github.io/generative-stack-lean/artifacts/visuals/generative_2d.html">Interactive 2D</a> (GitHub Pages)
</td>
<td align="center" width="50%">
<strong>3D Proof Map</strong><br/>
<em>Rotate, zoom, explore clusters</em><br/>
<a href="https://abraxas1010.github.io/generative-stack-lean/artifacts/visuals/generative_3d.html">
  <img src="artifacts/visuals/generative_3d_preview_animated.svg" alt="3D Proof Map preview" width="100%"/>
</a><br/>
<a href="https://abraxas1010.github.io/generative-stack-lean/artifacts/visuals/generative_3d.html">Interactive 3D</a> (GitHub Pages)
</td>
</tr>
</table>

### Layer Architecture

<p align="center">
<a href="https://abraxas1010.github.io/generative-stack-lean/artifacts/visuals/generative_stack_overview.svg">
  <img src="artifacts/visuals/generative_stack_overview.svg" alt="Generative Stack Overview" width="80%"/>
</a>
</p>

### Import Graph

<p align="center">
<a href="https://abraxas1010.github.io/generative-stack-lean/artifacts/visuals/import_graph.svg">
  <img src="artifacts/visuals/import_graph.svg" alt="Import Graph" width="100%"/>
</a>
</p>

**UMAP note (interpretation + limitations):**
- UMAP is a non-linear projection of high-dimensional feature vectors into 2D/3D; here the features are derived from Lean source text statistics and structural signals.
- Only *local neighborhoods* are intended to be meaningful; global distances/cluster geometry are not proof-theoretic invariants.
- Treat these maps as navigational aids; the formal guarantee is the Lean kernel check.

## Dependencies

- **Lean 4**: `leanprover/lean4:v4.16.0`
- **Mathlib**: `v4.24.0`
- **CombinatorialGames**: For PGame/Surreal bridge

## Verification

Run the full verification:

```bash
./scripts/verify_generative_stack.sh
```

This checks:
1. No `sorry` or `admit` in source
2. Clean `lake build --wfail`
3. Hash verification of key files

## License

**Copyright (c) 2022-2026 Equation Capital LLC. All rights reserved.**

This software is available under a **dual licensing model**:
- **AGPL-3.0** for open source, academic, and personal use
- **Commercial License** available for proprietary use

See [LICENSE.md](LICENSE.md) for details. Contact: rgoodman@apoth3osis.io

## Citation

If you use this formalization in your research, please cite:

```bibtex
@software{generative_stack_lean,
  title = {Generative Stack: A Lean 4 Formalization},
  year = {2025},
  note = {Mechanized proof that mathematical structure emerges from the Void}
}
```

## Contact

For questions or issues, please open a GitHub issue or contact rgoodman@apoth3osis.io

---

<p align="center">
  <em>Part of the <a href="https://apoth3osis.io">HeytingLean</a> formal verification project</em>
</p>

Commit message:

Update licensing to Apoth3osis License Stack v1 (#1)
* Update licensing to Apoth3osis License Stack v1

* Update licensing to Apoth3osis License Stack v1

README.md, after:

<img src="assets/Apoth3osis.webp" alt="Apoth3osis Logo" width="140"/>

<sub><strong>Our tech stack is ontological:</strong><br>
<strong>Hardware — Physics</strong><br>
<strong>Software — Mathematics</strong><br><br>
<strong>Our engineering workflow is simple:</strong> discover, build, grow, learn & teach</sub>

---

<sub>
<strong>Notice of Proprietary Information</strong><br>
This document outlines foundational concepts and methodologies developed during internal research and development at Apoth3osis. To protect our intellectual property and adhere to client confidentiality agreements, the code, architectural details, and performance metrics presented herein may be simplified, redacted, or presented for illustrative purposes only. This paper is intended to share our conceptual approach and does not represent the full complexity, scope, or performance of our production-level systems. The complete implementation and its derivatives remain proprietary.
</sub>

---

# Generative Stack - Verified Lean 4 Formalization

<p align="center">
  <strong>Machine-checked proof that mathematical structure emerges generatively from the Void</strong><br/>
  <em>
    Lean 4 formalization of the 7-layer hierarchy: Void → LoF → Eigenforms → Heyting → Surreals → Combinators → Types
  </em>
</p>

<p align="center">
  <img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/Lean-4-blue" alt="Lean 4"/>
  <img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/sorry-0-brightgreen" alt="No sorry"/>
  <img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/status-verified-success" alt="Verified"/>
</p>


## Credo

> *"The genome doesn't specify the organism; it offers a set of pointers to regions in the space of all possible forms, relying on the laws of physics and computation to do the heavy lifting."*
> — **Michael Levin**

Our company operates as a lens for cognitive pointers: identifying established theoretical work and translating it into computationally parsable structures. By turning ideas into formal axioms, and axioms into verifiable code, we create the "Lego blocks" required to build complex systems with confidence.

### Acknowledgment

We humbly thank the collective intelligence of humanity for providing the technology and culture we cherish. We do our best to properly reference the authors of the works utilized herein, though we may occasionally fall short. Our formalization acts as a reciprocal validation—confirming the structural integrity of their original insights while securing the foundation upon which we build. In truth, all creative work is derivative; we stand on the shoulders of those who came before, and our contributions are simply the next link in an unbroken chain of human ingenuity.

---

---

Part of the broader HeytingLean formal verification project: https://apoth3osis.io

## Overview

This repository contains a **standalone, verifiable** Lean 4 formalization of the Generative Stack - a 7-layer mathematical hierarchy proving that:

1. **Numbers arise** from pure distinction (Laws of Form)
2. **Fixed points exist** (Lawvere's theorem, type-theoretic and categorical)
3. **Games encode arithmetic** (Surreal number bridge)
4. **Logic structures emerge** (Heyting algebras from nuclei)
5. **Dimensional ratchets** constrain modality (1D→2D→3D)

## Quick Start

```bash
# 1. Ensure you have Lean 4 (elan recommended)
curl https://raw.githubusercontent.com/leanprover/elan/master/elan-init.sh -sSf | sh

# 2. Clone and build
git clone https://github.com/Abraxas1010/generative-stack-lean.git
cd generative-stack-lean
lake update
lake build --wfail

# 3. Verify with our script
./scripts/verify_generative_stack.sh
```

### Interactive Visualizations (GitHub Pages)

- **Landing Page:** https://abraxas1010.github.io/generative-stack-lean/artifacts/visuals/index.html
- **2D Proof Map:** https://abraxas1010.github.io/generative-stack-lean/artifacts/visuals/generative_2d.html
- **3D Proof Map:** https://abraxas1010.github.io/generative-stack-lean/artifacts/visuals/generative_3d.html

## Key Theorems

| Theorem | Location | Significance |
|---------|----------|--------------|
| `LawvereFixedPoint.lawvere_fixed_point` | `LoF/Bauer/LawvereFixedPoint.lean` | Type-theoretic Lawvere |
| `ccc_lawvere_fixed_point` | `LoF/Bauer/LawvereCategorical.lean` | CCC categorical form |
| `toIGame_addConway` | `Numbers/Surreal/BridgeToPGamePreservation.lean` | Addition preservation |
| `toIGame_negConway` | `Numbers/Surreal/BridgeToPGamePreservation.lean` | Negation preservation |
| `denote_steps` | `LoF/Combinators/Denotational.lean` | SKY combinator soundness |
| `reentry_fixed_eq` | `LoF/Nucleus.lean` | Fixed point identity |
| `omega_is_heyting` | `LoF/HeytingCore.lean` | Heyting from nucleus |

## Directory Structure

```
HeytingLean/
├── LoF/                    # Laws of Form layer
│   ├── Nucleus.lean        # Re-entry nuclei
│   ├── HeytingCore.lean    # Heyting algebra emergence
│   ├── BoundaryHeyting.lean
│   ├── Bauer/              # Eigenforms & Lawvere
│   │   ├── LawvereFixedPoint.lean
│   │   ├── LawvereCategorical.lean
│   │   ├── Eigenforms.lean
│   │   └── ...
│   └── Combinators/        # SKY calculus
│       ├── SKY.lean
│       └── Denotational.lean
├── Numbers/                # Surreal numbers
│   ├── SurrealCore.lean
│   └── Surreal/
│       ├── BridgeToPGame.lean
│       ├── BridgeToPGamePreservation.lean
│       └── LoFDerivation.lean
├── Topos/                  # Dimensional ratchet
│   ├── DimensionalRatchet.lean
│   └── DimensionalRatchetTranslate.lean
├── Quantum/                # OML layer
│   ├── OML/Core.lean
│   └── Translate/
└── Tests/
    └── UnifiedMathSanity.lean
```

## Proof Visualizations

Explore the proof structure in 2D and 3D:

<table>
<tr>
<td align="center" width="50%">
<strong>2D Proof Map</strong><br/>
<em>Pan, zoom, search 259 declarations</em><br/>
<a href="https://abraxas1010.github.io/generative-stack-lean/artifacts/visuals/generative_2d.html">
  <img src="artifacts/visuals/generative_2d_preview.svg" alt="2D Proof Map preview" width="100%"/>
</a><br/>
<a href="https://abraxas1010.github.io/generative-stack-lean/artifacts/visuals/generative_2d.html">Interactive 2D</a> (GitHub Pages)
</td>
<td align="center" width="50%">
<strong>3D Proof Map</strong><br/>
<em>Rotate, zoom, explore clusters</em><br/>
<a href="https://abraxas1010.github.io/generative-stack-lean/artifacts/visuals/generative_3d.html">
  <img src="artifacts/visuals/generative_3d_preview_animated.svg" alt="3D Proof Map preview" width="100%"/>
</a><br/>
<a href="https://abraxas1010.github.io/generative-stack-lean/artifacts/visuals/generative_3d.html">Interactive 3D</a> (GitHub Pages)
</td>
</tr>
</table>

### Layer Architecture

<p align="center">
<a href="https://abraxas1010.github.io/generative-stack-lean/artifacts/visuals/generative_stack_overview.svg">
  <img src="artifacts/visuals/generative_stack_overview.svg" alt="Generative Stack Overview" width="80%"/>
</a>
</p>

### Import Graph

<p align="center">
<a href="https://abraxas1010.github.io/generative-stack-lean/artifacts/visuals/import_graph.svg">
  <img src="artifacts/visuals/import_graph.svg" alt="Import Graph" width="100%"/>
</a>
</p>

**UMAP note (interpretation + limitations):**
- UMAP is a non-linear projection of high-dimensional feature vectors into 2D/3D; here the features are derived from Lean source text statistics and structural signals.
- Only *local neighborhoods* are intended to be meaningful; global distances/cluster geometry are not proof-theoretic invariants.
- Treat these maps as navigational aids; the formal guarantee is the Lean kernel check.

## Dependencies

- **Lean 4**: `leanprover/lean4:v4.16.0`
- **Mathlib**: `v4.24.0`
- **CombinatorialGames**: For PGame/Surreal bridge

## Verification

Run the full verification:

```bash
./scripts/verify_generative_stack.sh
```

This checks:
1. No `sorry` or `admit` in source
2. Clean `lake build --wfail`
3. Hash verification of key files

## License

This project is provided under the Apoth3osis License Stack v1.
See `LICENSE.md` and the files under `licenses/`.

## Citation

If you use this formalization in your research, please cite:

```bibtex
@software{generative_stack_lean,
  title = {Generative Stack: A Lean 4 Formalization},
  year = {2025},
  note = {Mechanized proof that mathematical structure emerges from the Void}
}
```

## Contact

For questions or issues, please open a GitHub issue or contact rgoodman@apoth3osis.io

---

<p align="center">
  <em>Part of the <a href="https://apoth3osis.io">HeytingLean</a> formal verification project</em>
</p>
